Qcv analysis update (#6317)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/climate/tutorials/ocean_qcv_analysis/tutorial.md

>
{: .agenda}

# Prerequisites

## Galaxy 
> <details-title>Galaxy account</details-title>
> Create or login to your [Galaxy Europe account](https://earth-system.usegalaxy.eu/login/start).
{: .details}

> <details-title>Galaxy tips and tricks</details-title>
> Once you are logged in, Galaxy is divided into 4 vertical panels:

> > - Far left: **Galaxy action list** (Upload, Tools, Interactive Tools…)

Reviewer: Is this intended as the very first Galaxy tutorial people do? If not, you can omit these basics and just add one of the intro tutorials as a prerequisite

> Nitrate calibration needs a potential reference dataset such as the **WOA annual climatology**.  
> You can [download it here](https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/thredds-ocean/catalog/woa23/DATA/nitrate/netcdf/all/1.00/catalog.html?dataset=woa23/DATA/nitrate/netcdf/all/1.00/woa23_all_n00_01.nc) and upload it into Galaxy.
{: .details}

# Manage your data

## Step 1: Get your data 

> <hands-on-title>Get your data from the S3 server</hands-on-title>
> - Click on **Upload** in the vertical panel on the left
> - In the pop-up window, click on **Choose from repository**
> - In the top search bar, search for `argo`
> - In the result list, select **Argo marine floats data and metadata from Global Data Assembly Centre (Argo GDAC)**
> - Navigate to `pub/dac/coriolis/4903881`
> - Tick the following:
>   - `4903881_meta.nc`
>   - All files under `profiles/`
> - Click on **Select** (bottom-right)
> - Remove the synthetic files `SR4903881_*.nc` (by clicking the trash icon)
> - Click on **Start**
> - Wait until all files are stored in your history on the right (green color)
>
> ![S3 upload interface](../../images/bgc_calib/s3_upload.png)
{: .hands_on}

> > <hands-on-title>Get your data from your computer</hands-on-title>

Reviewer: Are students supposed to do upload both from S3 and from their local computer for this tutorial? Or is it just extra info (in that case I would put it in a details box to make it clear it is just a tip for when they are doing their own analysis)

> - Click on **Upload** in the vertical panel on the left
> - In the pop-up, click on **Choose local file**
> - Select the files on your system (Argo float or WOA)
> - Click on **Open** then **Start**
> - Wait until all files are stored in your history (green color)
>
> ![Local upload interface](../../images/bgc_calib/local_upload.png)
{: .hands_on}

## Step 2: Organize your data

> > <hands-on-title>Create a dataset collection (from empty history)</hands-on-title>

Reviewer: this says from an empty history in the title, but the instructions assume the files are already in the history?

> - Click on **Select item** at the top of the history panel
> - Click on **Select all** (now visible at the top right)
> - Click on **All ## selected**

> > - Choose **Auto build list**

Reviewer: Please use snippets (FAQs) for standard tasks like this, rather than writing all the instructions out again (easier to keep everything up to date if the Galaxy interface changes again). If the FAQ needs updating, please feel free to do that

Author: Okay just did a new FAQ for this still need to put the link int his tuto now

> - In the pop-up window:
>   - Set the name: `4903881`
>   - Turn off **Remove file extension**
>   - Click on **Build**
>
> Once the collection is created, all files turn green. You can limit visible files using the eye icons in the history panel.
>
> ![Create collection - empty history](../../images/bgc_calib/collection_emptyhist.png)
> ![Collection build interface](../../images/bgc_calib/build_collection.png)
{: .hands_on}

> > <hands-on-title>Create a dataset collection (from non-empty history)</hands-on-title>

Reviewer: Same here, is this an alternative to the previous create collection hands-on box? or do they need to do both?

> - Click on **Select item**
> - Manually tick only the files of interest
> - Click on **## of ## selected**
> - Choose **Auto build list**
> - In the pop-up window:
>   - Set the name: `4903881`
>   - Turn off **Remove file extension**
>   - Click on **Build**
>
> ![Create collection - non-empty history](../../images/bgc_calib/collection_hist.png)
> ![Collection build interface](../../images/bgc_calib/build_collection.png)
{: .hands_on}

> > <hands-on-title>Change file extension (for WOA file)</hands-on-title>
> > - In the history panel, click on the **pencil icon** of the WOA NetCDF file
> > - In the central panel, go to the **Datatype** tab
> > - Set the **New type** to `NetCDF`
> > - Click on **Save**

Reviewer: Please use an FAQ here, you can pass the datatype they need to choose as a parameter to the snippet, so something like this:

```suggestion
> <hands-on-title>Change file extension (for WOA file)</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Change the datatype of the WOA file to `NetCDF`
> 
> {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_change_datatype.md datatype="NetCDF" %}
> 

```

>
> ![Change extension](../../images/bgc_calib/change_ext.png)
{: .hands_on}

<div class="Workflow" markdown="1">

# Run a predefined workflow

> <hands-on-title>Run a public workflow</hands-on-title>
>

> > - Click on **Workflows** on the vertical panel on the left of the **Galaxy action list**  

Reviewer: Not sure if we already have an FAQ for this, if so please use it, otherwise it would be great if you could make one? (I can also help)

Author: I'll try to do it and update the ones I need in the same time I guess

Author: OKay I tried something let me know if it's okay. If yes I will include those snippets in my tuto

> - Ensure the tool version is **v5.8_1** (change via the 3 cubes on the left if needed)
> - Set parameters:
>   - *Load data automatically*: **Yes**
>   - *NetCDF or tabular text file*: select `ODV collection manager output` or drag and drop `odv_collection.txt`
>   - *Do you have a view?*: **Yes** → drag and drop `qualification_startingPoint_nitrate.xview`
> - Click **Run**
>
> ![ODV launch](../../images/bgc_calib/odv_launch.png)
{: .hands_on}

> <details-title>How to open ODV</details-title>
> - When ODV is ready, a red dot appears on **Interactive Tools**  
> - Click it → open the ODV panel → click the expand symbol  
> - ODV opens in a new window with your selected view  
>
> ![ODV interactive tool](../../images/bgc_calib/odv_launch_2.png)
> ![ODV nitrate view](../../images/bgc_calib/odv_view.png)
{: .details}

> <tip-title>ODV inactive</tip-title>
> After some inactivity, the ODV window may close. Just refresh the browser tab.
{: .tip}

> <tip-title>Copy/paste in ODV</tip-title>
> Open the clipboard (3 dots on the left panel) to copy-paste text.
> ![Clipboard in ODV](../../images/coastal_water_dyn/clipboard.png)
{: .tip}

> ### Step 3: Qualify the dataset with ODV

Reviewer: Please remove the Step 1/2/3 etc, it isnt necessary and just makes it harder to add steps later
